---
layout: page
title: Going the Rounds
subtitle: Virality in Nineteenth Century American Newspapers
bigimg: /img/0702141-small-716.jpg
---

## Approved Book Proposal

Primary: Ryan Cordell, Northeastern University Contact:
<r.cordell@neu.edu> or 508-918-0125

Co-authors: David A. Smith, Abby Mullen, Jonathan Fitzgerald, and Thanasis Kinias

<a name="toc"></a>

Table of Contents
-----------------

1.  [Introduction](#introduction)
2.  [Book Description](#description)
3.  [Apparatus and Authorship](#apparatus)
4.  [Author Biographies and CVs](#biographies)
5.  [Appropriateness for Manifold Scholarship](#manifold)
6.  [Audiences and Markets](#audiences)
7.  [Chapter and Digital Component Descriptions](#chapters)
8.  [Supplemental Writing Samples](#supplement)

<a name="introduction"></a>

[Introduction](#toc)
--------------------

*Going the Rounds: Virality in Nineteenth-Century American Newspapers*
brings together literary, historical, and computational criticism to
illuminate the extent, content, and character of information exchange in
nineteenth-century US periodicals. Drawing on reprinted texts from the
NEH-, Mellon-, and ACLS-funded Viral Texts Project at Northeastern
University (<http://viraltexts.org>), the book and its attendant digital
components situate widely reprinted newspaper genres such as lists,
scientific reports, recipes, travel accounts, and vignettes at the
center of the period's print culture. Drawing on methods such as text
mining, geospatial analysis, and network analysis, the book offers a
new, systemic account of information exchange in the nineteenth
century's primary mass medium. *Going the Rounds* also sketches a
proto-history of virality, bringing together ideas from new media
scholarship, digital humanities, bibliography, and book history to
account for the movement of fragmentary, malleable texts through
communications networks comprised of type, telegraph wires, post roads,
and rail. A viral theory of textuality foregrounds circulation and
reception, describing the ways texts moved through the social,
political, literary, and technological networks that undergirded
nineteenth-century print culture. Indeed, the book proposes that a
robust theory of virality, developed from corpus-level text analysis,
offers a critical perspective that allows us to understand
nineteenth-century circulation not simply as "arbitrary, irregular
transmission of tales, essays, and poems," as J. Gerald Kennedy
describes it in *Poe and the Remapping of Antebellum Print Culture* (LSU
Press 2012), but instead as a complex but comprehensible system of
textual exchange and influence that can historicize and help us better
understand our current social media culture. <a name="description"></a>

[Book Description](#toc)
------------------------

Nineteenth-century newspapers exemplify a textual system founded on
borrowing, anonymity, adaptation, and circulation. Editors composed
their newspapers with both "scissors and the quill," trading their
papers with each other through the post for reciprocal use and filling
their daily or weekly issues with "selections" from other newspapers on
their exchange lists. As the *Fremont Journal* (Ohio) claimed in 1854,
"\[d\]eprive an editor of his exchanges, shut off his mails for a week,
and you take away from him his very sustenance, and withdraw from him
all that makes his paper interesting." Newspapers, the *Journal*
asserted, operate under a "general 'reciprocity treaty'…so that each may
assist the other in collecting intelligence and together circulate the
vast amount of news, of politics and literature, that circulates through
the thousand columns of the periodical press over the land." The
literature that thrived in these networks was marked by its malleability
in form, content, and interpretation. These texts were, in short,
ancestors of modern "viral media," embedded in an early platform of mass
cultural production. *Going the Rounds* draws on Northeastern
University's Viral Texts Project to trace the "morselized" information
circulating in nineteenth-century newspapers, not by searching for
individual texts or authors, but instead by employing methods from
natural language processing and computational linguistics to read across
the digitized newspaper corpora. Such an approach takes up the challenge
of "distant reading" with an aim not to replace historical or textual
evidence with graphs, maps, or trees, but to uncover and model new forms
or sets of evidence difficult to discern at the level of the individual
newspaper. In *Going the Rounds*, such evidence leads to a hybrid and
capacious vision of newspaper reprinting as a textual ecosystem in which
genres of "information literature"—e.g. lists, trivia, recipes—jostled
with news, humor, sentiment, and familiar literary genres, both on the
newspaper page and in its readers' attention. Considered as individual
snippets, selections of information literature might read like ephemera,
even filler. When identified, grouped, and considered as a corpus,
however, the selections that thrived within the exchange system become
instead vital markers of the priorities, concerns, and amusements of the
period's print culture. Popular reprinted texts offer a unique view into
the zeitgeist—marked day-by-day, rather than by year or decade—of the
nineteenth-century middle class. *Going the Rounds* attends to newspaper
selections as a dynamic and understudied corpus of popular American
writing in order to begin answering broader questions in intellectual,
cultural, and book history, including: what happens to our accounts of
popular writing and reading when we remove almost entirely notions of
originality and literary authorship? How can we weave the informational
and fragmentary textuality of the newspaper into our understanding of
nineteenth-century literature? How do historical systems of information
exchange foreshadow contemporary ideas such as virality, and conversely
how might theorizations of online sharing help us rethink the operations
of historical social media? These disciplinary engagements necessarily
pose another, meta-disciplinary question. How should the large-scale,
digitized historical archive restructure the scale of our arguments in
literary history: not necessarily open toward the "*longue durée*"
advocated by David Armitage and Jo Guldi in *The History Manifesto*, but
instead toward a panoramic textual vista for evidencing scholarly
arguments? In addition to elucidating new texts worthy of scholarly
attention, *Going the Rounds* uses those texts at scale to begin
outlining the larger geographic, social, and technological networks that
underlay the period's print culture. In this way, *Going the Rounds*
provides a macro-view of reprinting as an evolving system that connected
shifting configurations of publications and readers over the century.
<a name="apparatus"></a>

[Apparatus and Authorship](#toc)
--------------------------------

*Going the Rounds* is a uniquely hybrid and collaborative publication
emerging from the interdisciplinary work of the Viral Texts Project,
housed at Northeastern's NULab for Texts, Maps, and Networks. Viral
Texts began as an analysis of reused texts across the Library of
Congress's Chronicling America newspaper collection. Through funding
from the NEH, Mellon Foundation, and ACLS, we have over the past three
years expanded our study to include magazines from the Library of
Congress's Making of America collections, published through Cornell and
Michigan; Gale's British and American newspaper collections; Readex's
American Periodicals Series Online; and non-English materials from
Europeana's digital newspaper collections, from which we have identified
many millions of texts reprinted in the US and abroad. These
computationally identified "viral texts" have been supplemented by
traditional archival work Cordell has conducted in periodicals archives
held by the University of Virginia Libraries, the American Antiquarian
Society, and various colleges with denominational holdings. *Going the
Rounds* is a multigraph, with Ryan Cordell as the primary author but
with both print and digital sections co-written by other members of the
Viral Texts Project team from Northeastern University's Computer
Science, English, and History departments. As a multigraph, the book
develops a consistent argument, like a monograph, but includes a wider
range of writerly voices that reflect the interdisciplinary work that
underlies its arguments. Through this structure, *Going the Rounds*
offers a model for academic authorship that rightly reflects the
collaborative work increasingly common in humanities research projects.
<a name="biographies"></a>

[Author Biographies and CVs](#toc)
----------------------------------

Ryan Cordell is Assistant Professor of English and Core Founding Faculty
Member in the NULab for Texts, Maps, and Networks at Northeastern
University. His scholarship focuses on convergences among literary,
periodical, and religious culture in antebellum American mass media.
Cordell is currently a Mellon Fellow of Critical Bibliography at the
Rare Book School in Charlottesville, Virginia, and holds an ACLS Digital
Innovation Fellowship during the 2015-2016 academic year. He also serves
as Co-Editor-in-Chief of centerNet's *DHCommons* journal and writes
about technology in higher education for the group blog ProfHacker at
the *Chronicle of Higher Education*. [View Cordell's
CV](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1lVhRANVs1EST-g8n9Mnb7bMdfZKnE47QVBGgBILGww4/pub).
David Smith is an assistant professor in Northeastern University's
College of Computer and Information Science and a founding member of the
NULab for Texts, Maps, and Networks. Before his Ph.D. in Computer
Science from Johns Hopkins, he received a B.A. in Classics (Greek) from
Harvard. He has also worked for Tufts' Perseus Digital Library Project
and UMass Amherst's CS department. His research centers on natural
language processing and computational linguistics, with applications to
information retrieval, digital libraries, digital humanities, and
political science. [View Smith's
CV](http://www.ccs.neu.edu/home/dasmith/dasmith-cv.pdf). Abby Mullen is
a PhD candidate in world history at Northeastern University. Her
dissertation is titled *In the Sea of Tripoli: Maintaining Peace and War
in the First Tripolitan War, 1801-1805*. Her work explores the ways in
which the United States entered the international community through
naval war against Tripoli in the early republic. She is a fellow at
Northeastern's NULab for Texts, Maps, and Networks, where she works as a
research assistant on the Viral Texts Project. [View Mullen's
CV](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1NduN570l6CfJc2odAeHDNHNZbuFcQLSHKBPGqlPrfz8/pub).
Jonathan D. Fitzgerald is a PhD student in the English Department at
Northeastern University; a research assistant for the Viral Texts
Project; a fellow in the NULab for Texts, Maps, and Networks; and
managing editor of *Digital Humanities Quarterly*. His interests include
Literary Journalism, American nonfiction, and Digital Humanities. Before
enrolling at Northeastern, Fitzgerald worked as a freelance journalist,
with articles and essays appearing in publications such as the *Boston
Globe*, *Wall Street Journal*, *The Atlantic*, *The Daily Beast*, and
others. In 2013, Bondfire Books published his short ebook, *Not Your
Mother's Morals: How the New Sincerity is Changing Pop Culture for the
Better*. [View Fitzgerald's CV](http://jonathandfitzgerald.com/cv/).
<a name="manifold"></a>

[Appropriateness for Manifold Scholarship](#toc)
------------------------------------------------

*Going the Rounds* will be unique and, we believe, notable in its form
and media. The book will be a deeply hybrid project that moves beyond
the typical—and typically uninspiring—model of the print book with a
digital supplement. Instead, we propose linked print and digital
components that mutually inform one another, as we outline in the
chapter descriptions in the next section of this proposal. In short,
each print chapter is paired with a digital element, which does more
than simply supplement the argument in print. Instead, these digital
elements are resources, exhibits, or interactive components that expand
the chapters' inquiries in new directions, provide research data that
other scholars might find useful, or model computational analyses
difficult to synthesize in print. It is import to us that we find a
press not simply willing, but eager to back an experimental publication
and, indeed, to help us think creatively about what a book drawn from a
large-scale digital humanities project might be. For these reasons, we
are eager to work with the University of Minnesota Press' Manifold
Scholarship Initiative, as it represents the most ambitious and creative
effort to take the digital seriously in regards to academic publishing.
The Manifold platform will enable us to closely integrate the arguments
of our chapters with their digital complements in the digital version of
the book, and we expect Minnesota's editors are also well positioned to
help us envision a print book that works in active dialogue with the
project's online components. Indeed, our project will offer a range of
test cases that should be useful to the Press as the Manifold platform
develops, and we would be eager to be active partners in that
development. As the chapter and digital components make clear, we
propose a diverse set of digital elements, including databases,
exhibits, and visualizations. We hope that our project will be a welcome
challenge, helping clarify what a digital publication platform might
provide—indeed, what "publication" might mean—for large-scale, expansive
digital humanities projects. We are have local resources that will allow
us to be flexible as the project and Manifold platform develop. For
instance, we have infrastructure in the Library at Northeastern
University for the support of digital publication, and could potentially
host and maintain some digital components there under the imprimatur of
the press if these fall outside Manifold's technical capabilities. In
addition to the sample writing included in our proposal packet, we have
prepared prototypes and samples of the digital work that will comprise
this project. In all cases these elements are in active development, and
the versions we share in the proposal illustrate the potential, not the
final form, of the digital components outlined in the section below.
<a name="audiences"></a>

[Audiences and Markets](#toc)
-----------------------------

*Going the Rounds* will include approximately 200 print pages. We have
enclosed sample writing that will be adapted in several of its chapters,
as described in the chapters section below. The book draws from and
intervenes in scholarly discussions across the fields of American
literature, history of the book, periodical studies, bibliography, media
studies, and digital humanities, exemplifying the vital,
cross-disciplinary investigation N. Katherine Hayles and Jessica
Pressman recently named "comparative textual media" (University of
Minnesota Press 2013). Given its interdisciplinary origins and
arguments, the book will appeal to a wide range of markets. First, the
book will interest scholars and graduate students in the digital
humanities and computer science. Next, the book will appeal to scholars
and graduate students interested in nineteenth-century American history,
literature, and culture, whether in literature, history, or American
studies programs. We also expect the book to interest to scholars in
textual studies and book history. Finally, we anticipate a popular
audience. Given widespread interest in modern viral media, we have seen
significant public interest in the Viral Texts Project—including press
coverage through venues such as *Wired* magazine or NPR's *On the
Media*—and we expect such popular excitement will translate to this
project as well. More specifically, *Going the Rounds* contributes to a
recent boom in histories of material print culture in antebellum
America, digital humanities, media archeology, and American religious
history. The book extends—and in some cases challenges—the insights of
literary historians who have worked to situate notions of authorship,
literary property, and reading within the messy, material conditions of
nineteenth-century print culture, including Meredith McGill's *American
Literature and the Culture of Reprinting* (2003), Trish Loughran's *The
Republic in Print* (2007), Leon Jackson's *The Business of Letters*
(2008), Lara Langer Cohen's *The Fabrication of American Literature*
(2011), Ellen Gruber Garvey's *Writing with Scissors* (2012), and Sari
Edelstein's *The Novel and the News* (2014). Even as such scholars have
ventured beyond the book to think more capaciously about American print
culture and authorship, their arguments have remained largely bound up
with exemplary authors: Fern, Lippard, Yonge, or Hawthorne, Poe, even
Dickens. By searching not for individual texts or authors, but instead
reading across the digitized newspaper corpora, *Going the Rounds*
proposes a much more diverse and atomized scene of popular reading than
previous literary histories. *Going the Rounds* closely aligns accounts
of everyday reading and writing with scholarship on the social and
mechanical technologies that underlay antebellum print culture,
including David M. Henkin's *The Postal Age* (2006), Daniel Walker
Howe's *What Hath God Wrought: The Transformation of America, 1815–1848*
(2007), Susan Schulten's *Mapping the Nation* (2012), and, though it
focuses on Britain, Aileen Fyfe's *Steam-Powered Knowledge* (2012). Just
as the computational methods presented here thicken more traditional
literary-historical accounts of reprinting, so too does *Going the
Rounds* contribute to the growing body of literature on computational
analysis in the humanities, including Franco Moretti's *Graphs, Maps,
Trees* (2005), Stephen Ramsay's *Reading Machines* (2011), and Matt
Jockers' *Macroanalysis* (2013). In particular, the book puts into
practice an active shuttling between scales of analysis that these books
advocate but rarely demonstrate—a method of zoomable reading that
eschews the opposition typically set up between close and distant
reading. Finally, the historical investigation that comprises the bulk
of the book informs and is informed by theorizations of textuality and
virality such as D. F. MacKenzie's *Bibliography and the Sociology of
Texts* (Cambridge UP 1986), Jerome McGann's *Radiant Textuality* (2004),
Henry Jenkins' *Convergence Culture* (2006), N. Katherine Hayles and
Jessica Pressman's *Comparative Textual Media* (2013), and Karine Nahon
and Jeff Hemsley's *Going Viral* (2013). The previous publication of
different versions of some book sections in essay collections and top
digital humanities or American literature journals demonstrates the
existence of an audience for new paradigms for reading nineteenth
century print culture such as the book will offer. An article that
includes material from the Introduction and the Afterword appears in the
collection *Virtual Victorians*, edited by Veronica Rose Alfano and
Andrew Stauffer (Palgrave Macmillan, 2015). Material from Chapters 1 and
2 appear in a pair of articles (one literary-historical, one
methodological) in the August 2015 issue of *American Literary History*.
Other materials from Chapter 2 appear in a forthcoming article in
*American Periodicals*. Finally, portions of chapter 5 were published as
"'Taken Possession of': The Reprinting and Reauthorship of Hawthorne's
"Celestial Railroad" in the Antebellum Religious Press" in *Digital
Humanities Quarterly*. That article won the 5th Annual Best Article
Prize from ProQuest and the Research Society for American Periodicals in
2013. All involved journals freely grant permissions for this work to
appear in a monograph. Some of the digital components will expand or
revise work currently online; these instances are described below.
<a name="chapters"></a>

[Chapter and Digital Component Descriptions](#toc)
--------------------------------------------------

### Introduction: "Viral Textuality" by Ryan Cordell

This introduction begins in an unlikely place, with the newspapers of
the apocalyptic Millerite movement. Though the Millerites seem in many
ways like holdouts from a pre-Enlightenment age, predicting the literal,
apocalyptic Second Coming of Christ on October 22, 1843, we argue
instead for the essential modernity of the movement. Daily Millerite
newspapers like the *Midnight Cry!* and *Signs of the Times* gathered a
wide array of texts from newspapers, books, and magazines to discover
and map the day's news and information onto their understanding of the
"signs of the times" which fulfilled Biblical prophecy and signaled the
end times. These signals were aggregated—they were given symbolic shape
and coherence—by recomposition in the form of a daily nineteenth-century
newspaper. In other words, reprinting facilitated a new way of arguing
for a "Biblical" worldview. Selections from around the nation and the
world were reassembled in Millerite papers as evidence for apocalypse
and, just as prominently, guides to living moral, Christian lives in
anticipation of time's end. This chapter reads the Millerites as devout
participants in the informational mode expounded throughout *Going the
Rounds*, assembling their particular view of the world through selection
and republication. Next, the introduction situates *Going the Rounds*
within current scholarship on early nineteenth-century print history and
new media, proposing that reprinted selections in the period's
newspapers are an essential site of inquiry for understanding the
information economy of the period. This introduction brings modern
scholarship about memes, virality, and "spreadable media" into
conversation with literary-historical work on periodicals to build a
theory of viral textuality hinged on an analogy between the
cut-and-paste textual cycle of nineteenth-century print culture and our
current sharing practices online.

### Digital Introduction: "Bottom-Up Bibliography" by David Smith and Ryan Cordell

The digital introduction to the project describes the computational
methods of the Viral Texts project and provides users an updated,
generalized version of our reprint-detection algorithms for use with
their own corpora. These algorithms have allowed us to trace
nineteenth-century newspaper reprinting both more minutely—tracking the
movement of textual fragments, sometimes a few paragraphs long, through
the newspaper exchange network—and more expansively—describing
relationships among newspapers based on tens of thousands of shared
texts over years—than was possible in the print archive. Rather than
argue the superiority of so-called "distant reading," however, *Going
the Rounds* proposes a digital humanities scholarship that actively
moves between scales in a recursive and iterative process: work at the
corpus scale suggests details worth attending to in specific newspaper
issues, and time spent with those issues suggests new computational
questions that are tested across the corpus. The project code is
similarly flexible, adaptable for finding full texts, as we have, or for
analysis of shorter quotations across corpora.

### Chapter 1: "Information Literature" by Ryan Cordell

Edgar Allan Poe commented in 1846 that readers "now demand the light
artillery of the intellect; we need the curt, the condensed, the
pointed, the readily diffused—in place of the verbose, the detailed, the
voluminous, the inaccessible." This chapter takes Poe's characterization
seriously, grappling with the radically "curt," "condensed," and
"readily diffused" selections in the newspaper as exemplars of a central
rhetorical and literary mode during the nineteenth-century. Jokes,
scientific reports, recipes, domestic advice, trivia, and even lists
were valued by the editors who reprinted them and the readers who
clipped and saved them in scrapbooks. Considered individually, these
pieces seem ephemeral, but considered as a corpus of "viral texts," we
can discern commonalities between familiar and unstudied genres that
signal why particular texts went viral and others do not. The chapter
argues that a text's amenability to modification and recontextualization
directly impacted its spreadability. In particular, the chapter focuses
on "information literature"—e.g., lists, tables, recipes, scientific
reports, trivia columns—as genres that established the newspaper as a
serialized and communally authored compendium of useful knowledge,
drawing from and contributing to related book genres such as the journal
or encyclopedia. The information literature in American newspapers
stemmed from and contributed to the industrialization of knowledge
during the nineteenth century. In large part, antebellum newspaper
reprinting privileged texts for their edification or usefulness to
readers, not their originality. The exchange and republication of
information literature through the newspaper network—particularly when
those acts of exchange were staged through paper-to-paper
attribution—built up an idea of newspapers' citability and, eventually,
contributed to notions of journalistic objectivity.

### Digital Component 1: "Enhanced Viral Texts Database" by Abby Mullen, Jonathan Fitzgerald, David Smith, and Ryan Cordell

With early funding from the NEH, the Viral Texts team published [an
alpha database](http://viraltexts.northeastern.edu) of the clusters of
reprinted texts identified in the Library of Congress' Chronicling
America newspaper corpus. While it was a vast improvement over browsing
the raw spreadsheet data generated by the project's algorithms, this
database was hindered by our own evolving understanding of the kind of
data the project would produce, and how scholars would seek to use that
data. In short, we came to this project with an archival mindset,
envisioning a single, stable database that would grow as we added new
corpora to the study. However, this archival mindset has not squared
with the experimental nature of our work, in which different parameter
settings of our reprint-detection algorithm generate widely diverse
results, each set interesting for exploring particular questions about
nineteenth-century reprinting. To that end, we are adapting [the
Bookworm Project](http://bookworm-project.github.io/Docs/) to create a
more flexible interface that will enable other scholars to browse,
search, and visualize individual project datasets, as well as provide
stable references for individual clusters used in academic articles and
books, including *Going the Rounds*. Publication of this enhanced
database is an essential element of the larger book project, as it will
provide mechanism for readers to quickly reference the otherwise
abstract "textual clusters" that evidence our arguments throughout the
print and digital components of the book. Online prototype related to
this component: <http://viraltexts.northeastern.edu>

### Chapter 2: "The Network Author" by Ryan Cordell and Abby Mullen

This chapter argues that the composition and circulation of texts among
antebellum newspapers offers a model of authorship that is communal
rather than individual, distributed rather than centralized. It proposes
the "network author" to account for the ways in which meaning and
authority accrued to acts of circulation and aggregation across
antebellum newspapers. This idea of a network author extends notions of
reprinting, reauthorship, and the social text by identifying composition
in terms of writers, editors, compositors, and readers enmeshed in
reciprocal relationships of reception, interpretation, and remediation.
The chapter first demonstrates how reprinted pieces accrued authority
through circulation and commentary rather than through the prestige of a
known writer. From here the chapter pivots to more explicitly literary
writing, the "fugitive poems" or "fugitive verses" that circulated in
nineteenth-century periodicals anonymously, or whose authorship was
disputed. For instance, the *Burlington Free Press* (27 December 1850)
introduced an anonymous poem as a "charming little fugitive somnambulist
wandering about the newspaper world, wringing its little hands, and
imploring to be taken in," while the *Coconino Sun* (19 November 1898)
described the widely reprinted religious poem, "There Is No Death," as a
"fugitive poem that many authors claim." Nineteenth-century editors
evoked a range of meanings when they deemed poems "fugitives,"
simultaneously implying that such pieces were of limited interest while
enhancing the poems' appeal by introducing myths of their wide, disputed
circulations. Fugitive verses were preserved not through discrete acts
of publication, but through circulation and debate about their origins
and merits. In such verses, we see the network author function at work
even in the newspaper genre most likely to include an authorial byline.
Such pieces also blend the literary mode with the informational, as the
poems and their authors' supposed "real life" interweave to appeal to
readers. Like other species of newspaper texts, fugitive verses were
preserved through circulation, and through dynamic interplays among the
writers, editors, and the readers who composed, recomposed, excerpted,
and remediated them.

### Digital Component 2: "Two Ways of Looking at Nineteenth Century Newspaper Reprinting" by Ryan Cordell, Abby Mullen, and Jonathan Fitzgerald

This digital exhibit will follow the model established in the
smaller-scale exhibit, ["A 'Stunning' Love Letter to Viral
Texts"](http://loveletter.viraltexts.org). "Two Ways" will visualize and
analyze newspaper reprinting in two directions: first, through an
extensive critical annotation of a single newspaper issue and then
through an equally extensive critical annotation of a single reprinted
cluster through the newspapers in which it was reprinted. The first
facet of the "Two Ways" chapter will resemble the current "Love Letter"
exhibit, but aimed more squarely at a scholarly audience. While scholars
know that many nineteenth-century newspapers were comprised primarily of
reprinted selections, uneven citation practices make it difficult to
ascertain on any given page how much of its news is new. The Viral Texts
Project's data promises to give scholars a stronger sense of these
proportions. The database view, in which one sees clusters of particular
reprinted texts enumerated in chronological order, teaches us much about
the clusters themselves. But this disambiguation is itself a deformance
of the textual field. When we read texts as clusters of reprints in a
spreadsheet or database, we do not read them in the contexts of their
original publications. This exhibit inverts the database view,
demonstrating how the circulation of millions of texts across thousands
of newspapers manifested in a particular issue read by particular
readers on a particular day. Each reprinted piece on the page will be
analyzed, and linked to its larger cluster in the database described
above. Such annotation, of course, points out from this particular
newspaper issue out to more dispersed, networked scenes of reprinting.
In the second part of the exhibit, we will trace one such scene,
following one selection from our central newspaper to annotate more
extensively, building an argument about its resonances, meanings, and
uses for readers around the country. Online prototype related to this
component: <http://loveletter.viraltexts.org/>

### Chapter 3: "The Vignette and the Origins of Literary Journalism" by Jonathan Fitzgerald and Ryan Cordell

This chapter describes and theorizes a prototypical but largely
unstudied newspaper genre, the vignette. These are very short prose
pieces, typically a few paragraphs, that mark themselves simultaneously
as fact and fiction and embodies a complicated negotiation between
objective truth and subjective fiction that underlay much of the
period's literature. Scholars of French literature have posited the
*fait divers*—a more reliably sensationalistic cousin of the vignette—as
a central influence on early realist fiction in France. This chapter
situates the vignette as an equally important genre in antebellum
American letters, both influential in the development of sentimental
fiction and a precursor to the prose writing later styled "literary
journalism." The vignette in many ways encapsulates the medium of the
nineteenth-century newspaper: it is both fact and fiction, operating in
the gray space produced by a medium through which news, poetry, fiction,
and countless other genres jostled for readers' attention on the same
pages, a tension we can traced in much fiction. Consider *Uncle Tom's
Cabin*—a viral sensation in its own right and originally a newspaper
serial—which Harriet Beecher Stowe described as "sketches." Stowe
defended the "truth" of *Uncle Tom's Cabin* against critics by
publishing *The Key to Uncle Tom's Cabin*, a book that comprised almost
entirely clippings from Southern newspapers that ostensibly proved the
scenes and characters of her novel could have been true. Through its
form and situation, vignettes demonstrate similarly deep entanglements
between the newspaper's informational mode and the emotional mode of
contemporaneous fiction. As the century progressed, however, newspapers
increasingly sought to distance themselves from the intermingling of
fact and fiction exemplified in the vignette. In this way, the
vignette’s decline also serves as a model for the dramatic shift that
took place in journalism at the turn of the century: the romantic and
sentimental mode of the vignette was largely replaced by the more
fact-oriented and syntactically sparser sketch. In short, as
"objectivity" came to characterize journalism as distinct from
literature, the vignette faded from view, but its conversation with
nineteenth-century fiction had profound ramifications for what would
eventually become literary journalism.

### Digital Component 3: "Classifying Genres within Nineteenth-Century Newspapers" by Jonathan Fitzgerald, David Smith, and Ryan Cordell

While the clusters of reprinted texts we have identified in the Viral
Text project have helped reveal the miscellany and variety of popularly
reprinted text during the nineteenth century, they also expose the
challenges of meaningfully classifying those texts. Vignettes often
borrow the didacticism of advice columns; reports of scientific
discoveries rhapsodize about their spiritual ramifications. Meaningfully
classifying genres would both help other scholars sift through our
findings and allow us to perform nuanced analyses that compare corpus
level features among genres. This online feature will showcase our
efforts to computationally classify genres and provide an interactive,
user-generated genre tagging system that will allow other scholars to
contribute to the project's efforts. We will provide readable and
user-friendly examples of texts alongside an array of potential genres
that might apply to them. Users will be able to search for and read
texts that interest them and then, in order to move on to another
document, will be asked to answer a question relating to the genre of
the text they have just read. There are a number of ways we envision
making this an enjoyable activity for users, including through a
game-like interface or by serving up texts of interest to users based on
pre-specified interests or geographical proximity. For example, a user
in London may be offered a selection of texts from nineteenth-century
London newspapers. In this way, we will offer users tailored access to
the data we work with while also strengthening and reinforcing our
efforts to classify the genres of the texts and to discover where
readers agree and disagree about the malleable boundaries of genre.
Online prototype related to this component: A proof-of-concept genre
identification app can be found at
<https://fitz.shinyapps.io/VT-TestApp/>. This would be significantly
expanded, in both content and functionality, as part of *Going the
Rounds*.

### Chapter 4: "Reprinting the World" by Ryan Cordell

The fourth chapter of *Going the Rounds* widens the book's geographic
scope to consider reprinting across oceans and languages. Newspaper
reprinting was not simply an American phenomenon during the
nineteenth-century, and this chapter illuminates both how Americans
consumed newspaper content from abroad during the nineteenth-century and
how American writing circulated to Europe and Australia in the period.
Scholars well know that American newspapers frequently reprinted
material from newspapers, magazines, and books produced overseas, and
vice versa. Building on the earlier arguments in *Going the Rounds*,
this chapter applies our "bottom up bibliography" to evaluate
selections, regardless of author or origin, that strongly resonated
across national and even linguistic lines. To cite one small example,
one of the most widely-reprinted poems we have identified in the United
States is "The Inquiry" by Scottish poet Charles MacKay, which appeared
in hundreds of newspapers (and in gift books, sheet music, etc.) over
decades. While American papers, as a group, exchanged most frequently
with papers in the UK and its colonies, they also printed material from
other languages in translation, while non-English newspapers in the
United States frequently reprinted materials in other languages. For
instance, German-language newspapers made up a significant minority of
the papers printed in the United States during the period, and they
commonly reprinted material from German-speaking countries (as did
German-language papers in Australia and elsewhere). This chapter will
argue that newspaper reprinting was a primary medium for helping to
constitute readers' international imaginations and, as a necessary
converse, for solidifying their senses of national identity.

### Digital Component 4: "Mapping Networks of Nineteenth-Century Newspaper Exchange" by Ryan Cordell, David Smith, and Abby Mullen

This digital component of *Going the Rounds* will be the most
data-driven element of the project. This exhibit will feature a set of
interactive geographic and network visualizations drawn from the Viral
Texts project. These visualizations will not be the end product of the
exhibit, which will also include prose to help readers understand the
phenomena each illuminates, and offer an argument about how such
visualizations help us better understand systemic features of
nineteenth-century print culture. For instance, we use our data from
millions of reprinted clusters to statistically analyze and visualize
"likely paths" reprinted texts would have followed around the US at
different moments in the nineteenth-century. These paths will correlate
on the map with shifts in transportation or communications technologies,
such as the post roads, railroads, and telegraph, to explain how shifts
in newspaper exchange practices aligned with shifts in information
infrastructure during the period. These "most likely" paths would also
be contrasted with texts that follow statistically unlikely paths. Such
outliers can offer important counter-narratives to “typical” patterns,
such as propagation from large publishing centers to small towns. This
would be only one mapped argument within a set of visualizations: to
briefly cite one other example, an interactive network visualization
would underlie an argument about lines of influence among
nineteenth-century periodicals. Overall, however, this component will
serve as a bookend to the more textually-focused chapters in the
project, demonstrating the unique affordances of computational analysis
for not only surfacing new kinds of textual evidence, but for enabling
analyses of patterns across corpora that move beyond word frequency
graphs or static maps of bibliographies. Online samples related to this
component: Sample static visualizations can be found at the following
links, but these applications will be far more interactive, like built
using R’s Shiny app development environment:

-   <http://viraltexts.org/visualizations/>
-   <http://networks.viraltexts.org/>

### Afterword: "Viral Media Then and Now" by Ryan Cordell

The brief afterword reflects back from the scenes of newspaper
reprinting in the nineteenth century to our current age of viral media
online. During the early nineteenth century, a given text would be
written, printed in one periodical, distributed across the country, cut
out by exchange editors, reprinted in numerous other periodicals, cut
out by readers, and finally curated in scrapbooks. Today media is
produced for one website, aggregated on other sites, shared widely
through social media such as Twitter, even curated through personal
archives (digital scrapbooks) such as Facebook or Pinterest. While media
practices are not precisely parallel across one hundred and fifty years,
the afterword will suggest ways in which studying historical viral media
might help us see more clearly both the power and peril of media that
can be shared with millions in mere minutes. <a name="supplement"></a>

[Supplemental Writing Samples](#toc)
------------------------------------

1.  Ryan Cordell, "Reprinting, Circulation, and the Network Author in
    Antebellum Newspapers," *American Literary History* 27.3 (August
    2015), [download
    article](https://www.dropbox.com/s/uanxsowlo8xdcd9/Am%20Lit%20Hist-2015-Cordell-alh_ajv028.pdf?dl=0).
2.  David Smith, Ryan Cordell, and Abby Mullen, “Computational Methods
    for Uncovering Reprinted Texts in Antebellum Newspapers,” *American
    Literary History* 27.3 (August 2015), [download
    article](https://www.dropbox.com/s/63thjee4zi1mxzm/Am%20Lit%20Hist-2015-Smith-alh_ajv029.pdf?dl=0).
3.  Ryan Cordell, “Viral Textuality in Nineteenth-Century U.S. Newspaper
    Exchanges,” in *Virtual Victorians: Networks, Connections,
    Technologies*, ed. Veronica Alfano and Andrew Stauffer, Palgrave
    MacMillan (May 2015), [download
    article](https://www.dropbox.com/s/44lw5fqrebe0krk/Cordell-VirtualVictoriansArticle.pdf?dl=0).
4.  Ryan Cordell and Abby Mullen, “‘Fugitive Verses’: Poetry,
    Attribution, and Circulation in Nineteenth-Century American
    Newspapers,” accepted with revisions (currently underway) for
    *American Periodicals*, [review article in
    progress](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1u6GXZ01MZPh5s4aVffcB560kX9cLwWSe61ocN6j5P2Q/edit?usp=sharing).